The Academy Awards , commonly known as The Oscars , is an annual American awards ceremony honoring achievements in the film industry . Winners are awarded the statuette , officially the Academy Award of Merit , that is much better known by its nickname Oscar . The awards , first presented in 1929 at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel , are overseen by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) .
The awards ceremony was first televised in 1953 and is now seen live in more than 200 countries . The Oscars is also the oldest entertainment awards ceremony ; its equivalents , the Emmy Awards for television , the Tony Awards for theatre , and the Grammy Awards for music and recording , are modeled after the Academy Awards .
The 86th Academy Awards were held on March 2 , 2014 , at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles .
The first Academy Awards were presented on May 16 , 1929 , at a private dinner at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel with an audience of about 270 people . The post Academy Awards party was held at the Mayfair Hotel . The cost of guest tickets for that night 's ceremony was $5. Fifteen statuettes were awarded , honoring artists , directors and other personalities of the film-making industry of the time for their works during the 1927–28 period ; the ceremony ran for 15 minutes .
Winners had been announced to media three months earlier ; however , that was changed in the second ceremony of the Academy Awards in 1930 . Since then and during the first decade , the results were given to newspapers for publication at 11 pm on the night of the awards. This method was used until the Los Angeles Times announced the winners before the ceremony began ; as a result , the Academy has since 1941 used a sealed envelope to reveal the name of the winners .
The first Best Actor awarded was Emil Jannings , for his performances in The Last Command and The Way of All Flesh . He had to return to Europe before the ceremony , so the Academy agreed to give him the prize earlier ; this made him the first Academy Award winner in history . The honored professionals were awarded for all the work done in a certain category for the qualifying period ; for example , Jannings received the award for two movies in which he starred during that period and Janet Gaynor later won a single Oscar for performances in three films . Since the fourth ceremony, the system changed , and professionals were honored for a specific performance in a single film . For the first six ceremonies , the eligibility period spanned two calendar years .
Many movie historians believe that High Noon lost out for the 1952 Best Picture Award to The Greatest Show on Earth because the initial release of High Noon bared a panoramic view of modern downtown Los Angeles .
At the 29th ceremony , held on March 27 , 1957 , the Best Foreign Language Film category was introduced . Until then , foreign-language films were honored with the Special Achievement Award .
As of the 83rd Academy Awards ceremony held in 2011, a total of 2,894 Oscars have been given for 1,853 awards.
